4 September 2017It is with grave sadness that the African National Congress has received the news of the passing on of a young lion and one of our movement's most brave and fearless fighters, Comrade Sindiso Magaqa. Comrade Magaqa succumbed to injuries sustained in a shooting incident in July and passed away earlier today.A former Secretary General of the African National Congress Youth League, Comrade Magaqa was part of a generation of young people in the ANC who fought tirelessly for the realization of the vision of economic freedom. Elected at the ANC Youth League's 24th National Congress, he formed part of a collective which lived true to the clarion call by Frantz Fanon, that "each generation, out of relative obscurity, must discover its mission, fulfill it or betray it". For their commitment to their convictions, Comrade Magaqa and his comrades suffered differences with the leadership of the organization and marginalization within the structures of the movement.A true product of the revolutionary movement, Comrade Magaqa remained loyal to his organization, the African National Congress, eventually returning to the fold and deployed as a Councillor in the Umzimkhulu Local Municipality in KwaZulu-Natal. He understood that his generational mission remained unfulfilled and affirmed his belief in the ANC as the only reliable tool in the hands of the people to drive it. He served with diligence and distinction in the Council and as Member of the Mayoral Committee (MMC) at the time of his passing.Comrade Magaqa's life was testament to the abiding belief he had that the cause of the people shall triumph. He lived his life boldly and courageously, standing true to his convictions, in even the most trying times. He will forever be remembered as a gentle soul and a fearless fighter. His contribution to the struggles of youth and South Africans in general for economic freedom will never be forgotten. He leaves behind his unfinished life's work and we trust it calls upon the current generation of youth and youth activists to pick up his fallen spear and continue the mission for the realization of economic freedom in our lifetime.The African National Congress sends its deepest condolences to Comrade Sindiso Magaqa's family. May they find solace in the knowledge that we painfully share their loss and thank them for having borrowed the ANC and the country this incomparable son of the soil.Issued by the African National CongressEnquiriesZizi Kodwa 082 330 4910 National SpokespersonKhusela Sangoni 072 854 5707 National Communications Manager